Ohm's law solver (hybrid kinetic-fluid extension) (#3665)
ECP-WarpX/WarpX: Docs/source/theory/kinetic_fluid_hybrid_model.rst

.. _theory-kinetic-fluid-hybrid-model:

Kinetic-fluid Hybrid Model
==========================

Many problems in plasma physics fall in a class where electron kinetics do not
play a critical role in the solution. Examples of such situations include the
study of collisionless magnetic reconnection and instabilities driven by ion
temperature anisotropy, to mention only two. For these kinds of problems the
computational cost of resolving the electron dynamics can be avoided by modeling
the electrons as a fluid rather than kinetic particles. The simulation resolution
can then be set by the ion time and length scales (commonly the ion cyclotron
period :math:`1/\Omega_i` and ion skin depth :math:`l_i`, respectively), which
can reduce the total simulation time drastically compared to a simulation that
has to resolve the electron Debye length and CFL-condition based on the speed
of light.

Many authors have described variations of the kinetic ion & fluid electron model,

> generally refered to as particle-fluid hybrid or just hybrid-PIC models. The implementation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
generally referred to as particle-fluid hybrid or just hybrid-PIC models. The implementation
```

> in WarpX follows the outline from `Winske et al. (2022) <https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.01676>`_.

Reviewer: Ideally, it would be great if you could use BibTeX, as started in #3787, when adding references in the theory section (in this file and all other relevant files). It should be possible to add the reference entries to the existing `refs.bib` file and just cite them wherever needed.

Author: This is awesome! Thanks for pointing it out. Quick question though: you mention switching to bibtex for references in the `theory` section. Should I not use bibtex for the references in the `Examples` section?

Author: I went ahead and changed the references in the `Examples` section to also use bibtex. We can undo if you don't like it.

Reviewer: Thanks, I think it's good if we use it everywhere. I just mentioned the theory section because that's where references are typically used the most. Thank you for propagating the change to other sections of the docs, too.

This description follows mostly from that reference.

Model
-----

The basic justification for the hybrid model is that the system to which it is
applied is dominated by ion kinetics, with ions moving much slower than electrons
and photons. In this scenario two critical approximations can be made, namely,
neutrality (:math:`n_e=n_i`) and the Maxwell-Ampere equation can be simplified by
neglecting the displacement current term (Darwin approximation, see `Nielson and Lewis (1976) <https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/B9780124608160500154>`_),
giving,

    .. math::

>         \mu_0\vec{J} = \vec{\nabla}\times\vec{B}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        \mu_0\vec{J} = \vec{\nabla}\times\vec{B},
```

> where :math:`\vec{J} = \vec{J}_i - \vec{J}_e` is the total electrical current i.e.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where :math:`\vec{J} = \vec{J}_i - \vec{J}_e` is the total electrical current, i.e.
```

> the sum of electron and ion currents. Seeing as ions are treated in the regular

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the sum of electron and ion currents. Since ions are treated in the regular
```

PIC manner, the ion current, :math:`\vec{J}_i`, is known during a simulation. Therefore,
given the magnetic field, the electron current can be calculated.

> If we now furher assume electrons are inertialess, the electron momentum

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we now further assume electrons are inertialess, the electron momentum
```

equation yields,

    .. math::

        \frac{d(n_em_e\vec{V}_e)}{dt} = 0 = -en_e\vec{E}-\vec{J}_e\times\vec{B}-\nabla\cdot\vec{P}_e+en_e\vec{\eta}\cdot\vec{J},

where :math:`\vec{V_e}=\vec{J}_e/(en_e)`, :math:`\vec{P}_e` is the electron pressure
tensor and :math:`\vec{\eta}` is the resistivity. An expression for the electric field
(generalized Ohm's law) can be obtained from the above as:

    .. math::

        \vec{E} = -\frac{1}{en_e}\left( \vec{J}_e\times\vec{B} + \nabla\cdot\vec{P}_e \right)+en_e\vec{\eta}\cdot\vec{J}.

Lastly, if an electron temperature is given from which the electron pressure can
be calculated, the model is fully constrained and can be evolved given initial
conditions.

Implementation details
----------------------

.. note::

    Various verification tests of the hybrid model implementation can be found in
    the :ref:`examples section <examples-hybrid-model>`.

The kinetic-fluid hybrid extension mostly uses the same routines as the standard
PIC algorithm with the only exception that the E-field is calculated from the
above equation rather than it being integrated from a differential equation. The

> function `WarpX::HybridPICEvolveFields()` handles the logic to update the E&M fields

Reviewer: Maybe, here and below, we can render these code function names with "``" instead of italic?
```suggestion
function ``WarpX::HybridPICEvolveFields()`` handles the logic to update the E&M fields
```

when the "hybridPIC" model is used. This function is executed after particle pushing
and deposition (charge and current density) has been completed. Therefore, based

> on the usual time-staggering in the PIC algorithm, when `HybridPICEvolveFields()` is called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on the usual time-staggering in the PIC algorithm, when ``HybridPICEvolveFields()`` is called
```

> at timestep :math:`t=n`, the quantities :math:`\rho^n`, :math:`\rho^{n+1}`, :math:`\vec{J}_i^{n-1/2}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at timestep :math:`t=t_n`, the quantities :math:`\rho^n`, :math:`\rho^{n+1}`, :math:`\vec{J}_i^{n-1/2}`
```

and  :math:`\vec{J}_i^{n+1/2}` are all known.

Field update
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The field update is done in three steps as described below.

First half step
"""""""""""""""

> Firstly the E-field at :math:`t=n` is calculated for which the current density needs to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly the E-field at :math:`t=t_n` is calculated for which the current density needs to
```

be interpolated to the correct time, using :math:`\vec{J}_i^n = 1/2(\vec{J}_i^{n-1/2}+ \vec{J}_i^{n+1/2})`.
The electron pressure is simply calculated using :math:`\rho^n` and the B-field is also already

> known at the correct time since it was calculated for :math:`t=n` at the end of the last step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
known at the correct time since it was calculated for :math:`t=t_n` at the end of the last step.
```

Once :math:`\vec{E}^n` is calculated, it is used to push :math:`\vec{B}^n` forward in time

> (using Faraday's law i.e. the same as in the regular PIC routine with `WarpX::EvolveB()`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(using Faraday's law, i.e. the same as in the regular PIC routine with ``WarpX::EvolveB()``)
```

to :math:`\vec{B}^{n+1/2}`.

Second half step
""""""""""""""""

Next, the E-field is recalculated to get :math:`\vec{E}^{n+1/2}`. This is done
using the known fields :math:`\vec{B}^{n+1/2}`, :math:`\vec{J}_i^{n+1/2}` and
interpolated charge density :math:`\rho^{n+1/2}=1/2(\rho^n+\rho^{n+1})` (which is
also used to calculate the electron pressure). Similarly as before, the B-field
is then pushed forward to get :math:`\vec{B}^{n+1}` using the newly calculated
:math:`\vec{E}^{n+1/2}` field.

Extrapolation step
""""""""""""""""""

> Obtaining the E-field at timestep :math:`t=n+1` is a well documented issue for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Obtaining the E-field at timestep :math:`t=t_{n+1}` is a well documented issue for
```

.. _theory-kinetic-fluid-hybrid-model:

Kinetic-fluid Hybrid Model
==========================

> 

Reviewer 2: The sentence "For these kinds of problems the computational cost of resolving the electron dynamics can be avoided by modeling the electrons as a fluid rather than kinetic particles." only highlights the fluid approximation for electrons, but in my understanding the hybrid PIC models makes more assumptions:
- The electrons are assumed to be a neutralizing fluid (:math:`n_e=n_i`), which effectively suppresses Langmuir waves.
- Instead of updating the electric field with the Maxwell-Faraday law, the electric field is instead computed from a generalized Ohm's. This effectively suppresses light waves.

This points are made further down (using equations), but I think that it is worth making them early on.

Author: Sounds good. I changed the intro paragraph a bit to include those points. Let me know if you think we should make further refinements.

> Many problems in plasma physics fall in a class where electron kinetics do not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many problems in plasma physics fall in a class where both electron kinetics and electromagnetic waves do not
```

temperature anisotropy, to mention only two. For these kinds of problems the
computational cost of resolving the electron dynamics can be avoided by modeling
the electrons as a fluid rather than kinetic particles. The simulation resolution
can then be set by the ion time and length scales (commonly the ion cyclotron
period :math:`1/\Omega_i` and ion skin depth :math:`l_i`, respectively), which
can reduce the total simulation time drastically compared to a simulation that
has to resolve the electron Debye length and CFL-condition based on the speed
of light.

Many authors have described variations of the kinetic ion & fluid electron model,
generally referred to as particle-fluid hybrid or just hybrid-PIC models. The implementation
in WarpX follows the outline from :cite:t:`c-winske2022hybrid`.
This description follows mostly from that reference.

Model
-----

The basic justification for the hybrid model is that the system to which it is
applied is dominated by ion kinetics, with ions moving much slower than electrons
and photons. In this scenario two critical approximations can be made, namely,
neutrality (:math:`n_e=n_i`) and the Maxwell-Ampere equation can be simplified by

> neglecting the displacement current term (Darwin approximation :cite:p:`c-NIELSON1976`),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
neglecting the displacement current term,
```
In my understanding, the Darwin approximation does not neglect the displacement current term entirely, but instead it only neglects its transverse part. (Which effectively discards light waves, but retains the physics of the space charge field of a relativistic particle.)

It might be important to make this distinction since we might implement a Darwin solver later on in the code.

Author: I agree we should be careful with using "Darwin approximation", so I removed that part. I'd like to keep the reference though as it deals with particle codes in the non-radiative limit which is appropriate for this.

giving,

    .. math::

        \mu_0\vec{J} = \vec{\nabla}\times\vec{B},

where :math:`\vec{J} = \vec{J}_i - \vec{J}_e` is the total electrical current, i.e.
the sum of electron and ion currents. Since ions are treated in the regular
PIC manner, the ion current, :math:`\vec{J}_i`, is known during a simulation. Therefore,
given the magnetic field, the electron current can be calculated.

If we now further assume electrons are inertialess, the electron momentum
equation yields,

    .. math::

        \frac{d(n_em_e\vec{V}_e)}{dt} = 0 = -en_e\vec{E}-\vec{J}_e\times\vec{B}-\nabla\cdot\vec{P}_e+en_e\vec{\eta}\cdot\vec{J},

where :math:`\vec{V_e}=\vec{J}_e/(en_e)`, :math:`\vec{P}_e` is the electron pressure

> tensor and :math:`\vec{\eta}` is the resistivity. An expression for the electric field

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tensor and :math:`\vec{\eta}` is the resistivity tensor. An expression for the electric field
```

(generalized Ohm's law) can be obtained from the above as:

    .. math::

        \vec{E} = -\frac{1}{en_e}\left( \vec{J}_e\times\vec{B} + \nabla\cdot\vec{P}_e \right)+en_e\vec{\eta}\cdot\vec{J}.

Lastly, if an electron temperature is given from which the electron pressure can
be calculated, the model is fully constrained and can be evolved given initial
conditions.

Implementation details
----------------------

.. note::

    Various verification tests of the hybrid model implementation can be found in
    the :ref:`examples section <examples-hybrid-model>`.

> The kinetic-fluid hybrid extension mostly uses the same routines as the standard

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The kinetic-fluid hybrid extension mostly uses the same routines as the standard electromagnetic
```

PIC algorithm with the only exception that the E-field is calculated from the

> above equation rather than it being integrated from a differential equation. The

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
above equation rather than it being updated from the full Maxwell-Ampere equation. The
```

function ``WarpX::HybridPICEvolveFields()`` handles the logic to update the E&M fields
when the "hybridPIC" model is used. This function is executed after particle pushing
and deposition (charge and current density) has been completed. Therefore, based
on the usual time-staggering in the PIC algorithm, when ``HybridPICEvolveFields()`` is called
at timestep :math:`t=t_n`, the quantities :math:`\rho^n`, :math:`\rho^{n+1}`, :math:`\vec{J}_i^{n-1/2}`
and  :math:`\vec{J}_i^{n+1/2}` are all known.

Field update
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The field update is done in three steps as described below.

First half step
"""""""""""""""

Firstly the E-field at :math:`t=t_n` is calculated for which the current density needs to
be interpolated to the correct time, using :math:`\vec{J}_i^n = 1/2(\vec{J}_i^{n-1/2}+ \vec{J}_i^{n+1/2})`.
The electron pressure is simply calculated using :math:`\rho^n` and the B-field is also already
known at the correct time since it was calculated for :math:`t=t_n` at the end of the last step.
Once :math:`\vec{E}^n` is calculated, it is used to push :math:`\vec{B}^n` forward in time

> (using Faraday's law, i.e. the same as in the regular PIC routine with ``WarpX::EvolveB()``)

Reviewer 2: I am being a bit pedantic here (sorry!), but technically the Faraday's law is integrated form of the Maxwell-Faraday equation.
```suggestion
(using the Maxwell-Faraday equation, i.e. the same as in the regular PIC routine with ``WarpX::EvolveB()``)
```

to :math:`\vec{B}^{n+1/2}`.

Second half step
""""""""""""""""

Next, the E-field is recalculated to get :math:`\vec{E}^{n+1/2}`. This is done
using the known fields :math:`\vec{B}^{n+1/2}`, :math:`\vec{J}_i^{n+1/2}` and
interpolated charge density :math:`\rho^{n+1/2}=1/2(\rho^n+\rho^{n+1})` (which is
also used to calculate the electron pressure). Similarly as before, the B-field
is then pushed forward to get :math:`\vec{B}^{n+1}` using the newly calculated
:math:`\vec{E}^{n+1/2}` field.

Extrapolation step
""""""""""""""""""

Obtaining the E-field at timestep :math:`t=t_{n+1}` is a well documented issue for
the hybrid model. Currently the approach in WarpX is to simply extrapolate
:math:`\vec{J}_i` foward in time, using

    .. math::

        \vec{J}_i^{n+1} = \frac{3}{2}\vec{J}_i^{n+1/2} - \frac{1}{2}\vec{J}_i^{n-1/2}.

With this extrapolation all fields required to calculate :math:`\vec{E}^{n+1}`
are known and the simulation can proceed.

Sub-stepping
^^^^^^^^^^^^

> It is also well known that hybrid PIC routines require the B-field to be

Reviewer 2: Out of curiosity: what happens if we do not sub-step B? Does the simulation become numerically unstable?

Author: Yes, exactly. In my experience the field values grow until a particle is kicked out of bounds.

updated with a smaller timestep than needed for the particles. The update steps
as outlined above are therefore wrapped in loops that enable the B-field to be
sub-stepped. The exact number of sub-steps used can be specified by the user
through a runtime simulation parameter (see :ref:`input parameters section <running-cpp-parameters-hybrid-model>`).

.. _theory-hybrid-model-elec-temp:

Electron pressure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The electron pressure is assumed to be a scalar quantity and calculated using the given
input parameters, :math:`T_e`, :math:`n_0` and :math:`\gamma` using

    .. math::

>         P_e = n_0T_e\left( \frac{n_e}{n_0} \right)^\gamma.

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to denote the temperature as `T_e0` to emphasize that this is the initial temperature (just like `n_0` is the initial density.
```suggestion
input parameters, :math:`T_{e0}`, :math:`n_0` and :math:`\gamma` using

    .. math::

        P_e = n_0T_{e0}\left( \frac{n_e}{n_0} \right)^\gamma.
```
